Substituion Ciphers
    The alphabet is scrambled, shifted (Caesar) or reversed (Atbash) so each letter corresponds to a new letter in the substitution alphabet. When encoding each letter in the plain text message is replaced with a letter from the substitution alphabet.
    Traditionally, punctuation was omitted to disguise word boundaries and avoid 
    errors. The plain text can substituted as single letters, pairs of letters,
    etc.

    Caesar Cipher
        Also known as the shift cipher and is a type of substitution cipher. 
        The user picks a key between 1 and 26 (although 26 is pointless) and the 
        input message is shift across by that number. Encoding and decoding have slightly different algorithms.

    Atbash Cipher
        Substitution Cipher in which the alphabet is reversed. Encoding and decoding has the same algorithm. Doesn't require a key and is a stream cipher.

    Vigenere Cipher
        A series of Caesar ciphers are used to encrypt the message
   

Transposition Cipher
    The letters in the plain text aren't changed but rather reordered in some 
    way. For example, the message can be reversed.

    Reverse by Word
        The sentence is reversed by word but the letters of the word stay in the same order.
        Not very useful by itself.

    Reverse by Letter
        The order of characters in a sentence is reversed.

    Rail Fence Cipher
        Given a number of rails, e.g. 3. The message is broken up into that number of rails. For example, given the message='hellothere' and rails = 3, it would be borken up to look like this:
        h---o---r-
        -e-l-t-e-e
        --l---h---
        Then the characters are recorded 


DES - Data Encryption Standard
A type of block cipher
It takes a string of plaintext of fixed length and converts it to a cipher text of the same length.
The length of the string is 64bits
block size = 64bits
uses a 64 bit key (but only 56 bits are used)
the other 8 bits are used for checking parity
i.e. the key is stored in 8 bits and the 8th bit is used for error checking 's of odd parity'
decryption works the same way but the leys are used in the reverse order

Copied from Wikipedia
The ⊕ symbol denotes the exclusive-OR (XOR) operation. 
The F-function scrambles half a block together with some of the key. 
The output from the F-function is then combined with the other half of the block, 
and the halves are swapped before the next round. 
After the final round, the halves are swapped; 
this is a feature of the Feistel structure which makes encryption and 
decryption similar processes.

Information sourced from Wikipedia, plus notes to myself
